there's one concept in physics that
anytime i
talk to people about it they're always
really skeptical of it
and that is dark matter matter that only
interacts with
gravity and not with light so we can't
see it you know in any normal way
but just like how we can't see the wind
but we know it's there because the trees
move
we have our own ways of knowing that
dark matter is there
but they all rely on the fact that we
have understood gravity right
very recently there's been some research
published that suggests
that might not be the case so
is this the end for dark matter
now i've talked before on this channel
about the decades
worth of evidence and research that
piled up and powered up in powder before
astrophysicists
begrudgingly agreed that dark matter
must exist then it became accepted
theory canon if you will and i've talked
before on this channel
as well about all of the legitimate
alternate theories to gravity
that there are that don't need dark
matter that are sort of
rivals to our current accepted theory of
gravity
which is einstein's theory of general
relativity i'm going to summarize a
little bit
what those videos said i'm not going to
go into as much detail
so check those out as well if you're
interested i'll link them up in little
cards above and down in the video
description
below now one of these alternate
theories of gravity is called
monde modified newtonian dynamics
and it essentially takes newton's
equations of gravity and modifies them
slightly with this extra term and those
extra terms
only matter and only start to dominate
the equation when you have something
really big that's accelerating very very
slowly
like a galaxy of stars that is
rotating for example and the speed of
rotation of a galaxy has always been in
the top
five pieces of evidence that we have
for dark matter because they don't
behave the way
that we expect when we look at a galaxy
we see that the brightest part of a
galaxy is
the very center so we assume there are
more stars there
and therefore that's where most of the
mass is concentrated very similar to
the solar system right where the
majority of the mass more than 99
is actually concentrated in the center
in the sun and if you look at the speed
that the planets
orbit around the sun you can see that it
drops off as you get
further away from the sun but in
galaxies
stars don't do that it actually rises as
you get further out to the center
until it sort of plateaus out towards
the edge and this doesn't make sense not
even just in einstein's theory of
general relativity but
newton's law of gravity as well that we
all learn in
high school it means that there must be
more mass
on the outskirts of the galaxy then
there is in the middle of the galaxy but
what's not where we see
all the stars so therefore there must be
a huge amount of matter that we can't
see that's out there and black holes and
gas and dust and brown dwarfs and all
these other things that don't
shine that's not enough to account for
the amount of
matter that would need to be there to
explain
those flat rotation curves at the edges
of galaxies but if you use mond as your
theory of gravity instead and you have
this extra term in newton's equations
then that problem goes away because the
stars are orbiting at exactly the speed
that you expect them to be on the
outskirts
even if there is no extra matter there
but that's not everything solved monde
also does have
a lot of problems the main one being the
fact that it predicted that
gravitational waves wouldn't travel at
the speed of light but then in 2017
we found that they did when we detected
the simultaneous detection
of gravitational waves and optical light
and x-ray light and all sorts of
different gamma rays and everything
from the merger of two neutron stars so
despite
not having detected any dark matter or
knowing what it's made of like come on
particle physicists like what are you
doing like we're waiting on you
i gave you one job which to be there is
very difficult because it doesn't
interact with light and so therefore all
of our usual ways of detecting things
won't
work with dark matter but despite the
fact that we haven't detected any of it
einstein's theory of general relativity
combined with
90 of the universe's matter being dark
matter
still remains our best theory to
explain what we have seen in the
universe so all of the observations
we've made
and the evidence that we've collected is
sort of piled up in its favor
but this new research that has come out
has been led
by che and collaborators and they've
added evidence to the pile in favor of
mond and not dark matter so what did
they actually
find here and what were they actually
testing to to understand that we really
have to go back to
the basics like physics 101. so say we
have an object
like a car of mass m newton's second law
of motion says that the force needed to
accelerate that car
is proportional to the car's mass
something we call
the inertial mass of the car how much it
resists
motion at the same time newton's law of
gravity says that if we were to
drop that car from a big height above
the ground say
h the force felt by both the car
and earth is proportional to the mass of
the earth
the mass of the car and how far apart
the two
are this mass is what's called the
gravitational
mass how much an object attracts other
objects in the universe
due to gravity now newton assumed that
these two masses the
inertial mass and the gravitational mass
were one and the same and that's been
confirmed with a series of experiments
called the earthverse experiments that
show
that's true at least on the scales that
we can test
in the lab and that's something that's
now known as the equivalence principle
but in mond the equivalence principle
doesn't hold the inertial mass
doesn't equal the gravitational mass
instead the inertial mass this how much
an object resists
motion is also dependent on the
gravitational pull of
every other single object in the entire
universe in other words if you try to
accelerate your car you're doing it
fighting against the pull of the
andromeda galaxy
as well in the theory of mon this is
called the external field effect or efe
and it would mean that there would be a
relationship between the speed a galaxy
rotates
and how dense of an environment that's
found in i.e
how many galaxy neighbors does it have
does it have a lot of galaxy neighbors
or is it found relatively alone
in the universe and to the scientists
disbelief in this research study
that is what they found they found this
relationship so in 153 galaxies that
they studied
they found that in very dense
environments where there was lots of
galaxies grouped together
all those galaxies were pulling on the
stars on the
outskirts of the other galaxies meaning
that the rotation curve sort of
dipped on the outskirts where the stars
were being slowed down
by the pull of the galaxies nearby
whereas galaxies that are in a much more
isolated environment that are left
fairly alone in the universe there's
nothing pulling
on the stars of the edges of those
galaxies and so the rotation curve is
once again
quite flat because there's nothing to
slow down the stars
on the edges now apparently the authors
spent months
checking their work just to make sure
that it was robust and would stand up to
very intense
scrutiny because they knew that it was
going to get that they checked it for
measurement error and systematic error
and statistical errors but by the end of
it they just couldn't deny what they
found you know even the most die-hard of
dark matter fans
could not deny what had been found
now having said that that does not mean
that we are going to know just tear up
the theory of dark matter and throw it
out
the window because this is just one
piece of evidence it does not outweigh
the giant pile of decades worth of
research and evidence we already have in
favor
of dark matter there's more work still
to be done here including doing this
again but with a
much larger sample of galaxies you know
i will be a lot happier
if this is found with 153 000 galaxies
rather than just 153 because that could
just turn out to be you know random
statistical fluctuation or something
like that
and there are also still the other
observations of the universe that monde
fails to
explain including the mass in galaxy
clusters where galaxies are all grouped
together
where it still needs a small amount of
dark matter
to explain the observations so as usual
more work does need to be done but i'm
really curious and interested to see
what will come out of this you know
whether it'll be a full
shake off of the theory of dark matter i
don't know i
i doubt that personally but
i can imagine a future where perhaps you
know the best
bits of each theory are sort of merged
together
into a sort of newer shinier better
theory
that we have and maybe it turns out that
mond or
dark matter and general relativity will
each of them
maybe got it half right before we get to
the bloopers i just want to thank this
week's video sponsor
brilliant brilliant is a website with
learning courses across a huge
range of science and math topics the
courses are
interactive and this is what i love
about them because not only does it
engage you
with the topic that you're learning
about but it also really helps you to
visualize what's going on and actually
remember
what you've learned as well now as part
of their ridiculously detailed astronomy
course
they have a section on cosmology where
you can learn more about dark matter
why we think it exists and the math that
underpins this
best theory we have to explain our
observations of the universe
so if that sounds like something that
you've always wanted to wrap your head
around or
learn about the maths behind dark matter
and you want to support me and my
channel
then head to brilliant.org forward slash
dr becky that's
d-r-b-e-c-k-y and sign up completely
for free plus the first 200 people that
go to that link that it's in the video
description will get
20 off an annual premium subscription
which i think is pretty incredible
so thank you so much to brilliant which
to be fair
is very difficult because they're
difficult
the rotation curve stayed fairly flat
because the stars on the outskirts
weren't being
pulled on anything from motorbike
i'd sooner try modifying
gravity and to the authors of this
papers like disbelief that's what
this dish believe i believe
in dishes